Noise scaling tutorial (identity insertion/folding) (#1633)
unitaryfund/mitiq: docs/source/examples/scaling.md

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.14.1
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Noise Scaling Methods

> In this tutorial we will review the differences between noise scaling methods used in [Zero-Noise Extrapolation](https://mitiq.readthedocs.io/en/stable/guide/zne.html) (ZNE).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial we will compare the noise scaling methods available in [Zero-Noise Extrapolation](https://mitiq.readthedocs.io/en/stable/guide/zne.html) (ZNE), identity insertion and unitary folding.
```

> As a reminder, ZNE works by running multiple versions of the desired circuit, each intended to scale the noise up from the base-level achieved by the hardware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ZNE works by running multiple versions of the desired circuit, each intended to scale the noise up from the base-level achieved by the hardware.
```

Experimentally these experiments are often performed by pulse stretching, but as a quantum programmer, we typically do not have access to such low-level control.
For this reason we use "digital" methods that allow us to scale the noise using gate-based methods.
To this end, we will study circuit folding and identity insertion as methods to increase the amount of noise present in our computation.

> As a reminder, these techniques are summarized by the following equations, and can be performed in Mitiq with the associated functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These techniques are summarized by the following equations, and can be performed in Mitiq with the associated functions.
```

|                | Folding              | Identity Insertion |
| -------------- | -------------------- | ------------------ |
| Equation       | $G \to GG^\dagger G$ | $G \to I G$        |
| Mitiq Function | [`fold_global`](https://mitiq.readthedocs.io/en/stable/apidoc.html#mitiq.zne.scaling.folding.fold_global) | [`insert_id_layers`](https://mitiq.readthedocs.io/en/stable/apidoc.html#mitiq.zne.scaling.identity_insertion.insert_id_layers) |

## Comparison

To get started, we can demo what these two functions do to a small GHZ circuit.

> Each function (`fold_global` and `insert_id_layers`) take a circuit, and a specified scale factor which controls how much to increase the depth of the specified circuit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each function (`fold_global` and `insert_id_layers`) will take a circuit, and a specified scale factor as inputs. The specified scale factor controls how to increase the depth of the input circuit so that the achieved scale factor is exactly equal or very close to the specified scale factor.
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
from mitiq.benchmarks import generate_ghz_circuit
from mitiq.zne.scaling import insert_id_layers, fold_global

demo = generate_ghz_circuit(3)
scale_factor = 3

print("-----ORIGINAL-----")
print(demo)
print("\n-----------------FOLDING------------------")
print(fold_global(demo, scale_factor))
print("\n-----------------SCALING------------------")
print(insert_id_layers(demo, scale_factor))
```

Theoretically, these circuits should give the same result when measured, but due to noise, this is almost never the case.

> These two methods work both by extending the duration of the circuit, but do so in different ways that might be beneficial for different scenarios.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both methods work by extending the duration of the circuit
```
Structure of the original sentence sounded a bit weird.

When using folding, noise is amplified by applying additional gates, and in particular inverse gates.
Scaling amplifies noise by letting the qubits idle for longer _between_ computation.

```{warning}
Unitary folding scales noise by applying an additional layer $G^\dagger G$ to the circuit.
For non-hermitian gates $G$ and $G^\dagger$ may not have the same noise model, and hence noise is potentially scaled in an non-linear way.

Similarly, the noise that predominantly scaled in identity insertion is that of idle qubit noise/decoherence.
```

Let's now look at how much the depth of these circuit increase with different scale factors.

```{code-cell} ipython3
print(
    "{: >12}  {: ^14} {: ^14} {: ^15}".format(
        "scale factor", "original depth", "folded depth", "id insertion depth"
    )
)
for scale_factor in range(1, 10):
    folded_depth = len(fold_global(demo, scale_factor))
    id_insert_depth = len(insert_id_layers(demo, scale_factor))
    print(
        "{: >12}  {: ^14} {: ^14} {: ^15}".format(
            scale_factor, len(demo), folded_depth, id_insert_depth
        )
    )
```

> As expected we have $\mathtt{depth} * \mathtt{scale\_factor} = \mathtt{scaled\_depth}$.

Author: Good idea!

## Using noise scaling methods

> Here we demo how you can use these noise-scaling technique in ZNE.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here, we demo how you can use these noise-scaling technique in ZNE.
```

> First we define an [executor](https://mitiq.readthedocs.io/en/stable/guide/executors.html) which is needed to tell Mitiq how to run the circuit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, we define an [executor](https://mitiq.readthedocs.io/en/stable/guide/executors.html) which is needed to tell Mitiq how to run the circuit.
```

> Here we choose a simple density matrix simulation with depolarizing noise which acts between every circuit layer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We choose depolarizing noise via a simple density matrix simulation to act between every circuit layer.
```

We do this comparison by using an improvement factor (IF) which is defined as
```{math}
\left|\frac{\text{ideal} - \text{noisy}}{\text{ideal} - \text{mitigated}}\right|.
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
from random import uniform
import numpy as np

results = {"fold": [], "id": []}
for _ in range(100):
    gamma = uniform(0, 2 * np.pi)
    circuit = variational_circuit(gamma)

    ideal_expval = execute(circuit, noise_level=0.0)
    noisy_expval = execute(circuit)
    folded_expval = execute_with_zne(circuit, execute, scale_noise=fold_global)
    id_expval = execute_with_zne(circuit, execute, scale_noise=insert_id_layers)

    noisy_error = abs(ideal_expval - noisy_expval)
    folded_IF = noisy_error / abs(ideal_expval - folded_expval)
    scaled_IF = noisy_error / abs(ideal_expval - id_expval)

    results["fold"].append(folded_IF)
    results["id"].append(scaled_IF)

print("Avg improvement factor (`fold_global`):      ", round(np.average(results["fold"]), 4))
print("Avg improvement factor (`insert_id_layers`): ", round(np.average(results["id"]), 4))
```

> As we can see, both techniques offer an improvement.

Reviewer: Any idea why noise scaling improvement is 6x greater than folding? Under what conditions would we expect one to perform (much) better than the other?

Author: I was also very surprised by this! It's a good sign, but to be truthful, I'm not really sure why it's performing so well! My _guess_ is that is has something to do with applying inverse gates via folding cancels out some of the noise amplification? tagging @andreamari to see if he's got any ideas.

Reviewer: You can also use `mitiq.zne.inference.Factory.plot_data` and `mitiq.zne.inference.Factory.plot_fit` to see the scaling effects.

Reviewer 3: > I was also very surprised by this! It's a good sign, but to be truthful, I'm not really sure why it's performing so well! My _guess_ is that is has something to do with applying inverse gates via folding cancels out some of the noise amplification? tagging @andreamari to see if he's got any ideas.

I think it strongly depends on the simulated noise model.
The Cirq instruction `circuit.with_noise(cirq.depolarize(p=noise_level))` adds noise to **each qubit** after **each moment** independently from the applied gates. For this type of noise model, the insertion of identity layers is  optimal.

On the other hand, for a noise model in which a noise channel is applied after each gate, unitary folding is probably better.

Reviewer: thanks @andreamari! 

@natestemen, WDYT about this as a brief explanation at the end?

```suggestion
Both noise scaling techniques offer an improvement, but for this particular problem identity insertion outperforms unitary folding. 
The noise model adds noise to each qubit after each moment independently from the applied gates. For this type of noise model, the insertion of identity layers is optimal.

On the other hand, for a noise model in which a noise channel is applied after each gate, unitary folding would likely outperform identity insertion.
```

Author: I used the suggestion as a basis for [`4de60f9`](https://github.com/unitaryfund/mitiq/pull/1633/commits/4de60f91a51bd0419c221a2a092912a2604bac0b). WDYT?

## Conclusion

> In this tutorial we've shown how to use both folding and identity insertion as noise scaling methods for Zero-Noise Extrapolation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, we've shown how to use both folding and identity insertion as noise scaling methods for Zero-Noise Extrapolation.
```

```

```{code-cell} ipython3
from random import uniform
import numpy as np

results = {"fold": [], "id": []}
for _ in range(100):
    gamma = uniform(0, 2 * np.pi)
    circuit = variational_circuit(gamma)

    ideal_expval = execute(circuit, noise_level=0.0)
    noisy_expval = execute(circuit)
    folded_expval = execute_with_zne(circuit, execute, scale_noise=fold_global)
    id_expval = execute_with_zne(circuit, execute, scale_noise=insert_id_layers)

    noisy_error = abs(ideal_expval - noisy_expval)
    folded_IF = noisy_error / abs(ideal_expval - folded_expval)
    scaled_IF = noisy_error / abs(ideal_expval - id_expval)

    results["fold"].append(folded_IF)
    results["id"].append(scaled_IF)

print("Avg improvement factor (`fold_global`):      ", round(np.average(results["fold"]), 4))
print("Avg improvement factor (`insert_id_layers`): ", round(np.average(results["id"]), 4))
```

As we can see, both techniques offer an improvement, but for this problem identity insertion outperforms folding dramatically.
This is due to the fact that ZNE assumes one can scale the noise throughout a circuit by doubling, tripling, etc, the noise's strength.

> Identity insertion does exactly this, and hence has great performance on this simple noise model.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On the simple noise model used in our example, identity insertion does exactly this, and hence has great performance.
```

> Noise models with increased complexity would likely see more equal, or perhaps better performance by folding-based techniques.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Noise models with increased complexity and gate-dependent errors would likely see more equal, or perhaps better performance by folding-based techniques.
```
